---
title: "Random Free Games Night 1: Stranger Things 3"
date: 2021-12-03
series:
  - Random Free Games Night
tags:
  - video games
  - reviews
---

**TLDR**: Well executed, but good thing it was free. Probably won't play again.

When I ran out of Episode 5 of [The Long Dark](https://www.thelongdark.com/) on
[stream](https://twitch.tv/mraltreussir) I didn't really know what to do with
myself. I'd set aside 2 hours on a Wednesday night for this and I didn't want to
go back to just getting a good night's sleep and a screen break!

So I decided to try all of the free games I've been getting from the Epic store;
a piece of software I only have an account on because I was promised a new
Unreal Tournament was in the works. I tried the demo; it's quite good; it's
probably not going to be finished. I think that, as a society, we can start to
move on from this injustice.

So it was that on November 12th, 2021, I rolled the virtual die and was
instructed by the arbitrary laws of the universe to play *Stranger Things III:
The Game*.

Each week on a Wednesday we will be giving another game 2 hours to sink or swim;
and then we write about it.

# Stranger Things 3: The Game

Most of these games I've seen little about besides the videos on the store page
that made me install it in the first place. This one, I saw the name, and
wondered what sort of game could be affiliated with the eponymous hit TV show.

Jumping in with both feet I was pleasantly surprised to see an isometric video
game with low-res graphics that has actually gone to the effort of trying to
mimic games of the early 90s Sega Megadrive era. It wears the style on its
sleeve, playing heavily into the absurdity of those games: your starting
characters are able to swing a baseball bat and fire a catapult with startling
effect, and nobody bats an eye as two young hoodlums run rampant in the mall,
destroying handbags and ice creams in this fashion in order to find the goodies
inside.

Yes, like all games from the nineties, coins can be found in ice creams.

Fans of the TV series will vaguely recognise the plot of the game through
dialogue and quests, delivered piecemeal among minor callbacks to the show and
completely outlandish and irrelevant scenarios. Remember when Will and Lucas
helped out that shop owner who had been foreclosed on by beating up mutated rats
and Russians in order to find five personal items for said owner? No, nor I.

Were it not for the fact this style of gameplay and this aesthetic work
hand-in-hand, the whole game would be a wreck of mismatched fights and puzzles
with a plot that seems irrelevant. Quick-time hacking games, brawling fights
with hostile Russians, and bizzarely underexplained puzzles all held together by
a story already told in another medium would make no sense whatsoever in a
modern game in a modern style, but are entirely forgiven when presented as if
contemporary with such spin-off games like Toy Story and Aladdin, and
gratuitously reckless games like Mortal Kombat and Street Fighter.

As it is, the two-hour session allocated to every game in this series became a
three-hour game, three hours of "This is awful, why am I still playing?"â€”perhaps
the most telling feature of this session. It was a genuine opinion at the time:
the game was terrible, but this retro, ridiculous sort of terrible that
commanded my attention and drew me into playing more.

Nevertheless, I can't imagine paying for this game, and I can't say I'm likely
to play it some more in my off time. The game has the air of one that was going
to be made anyway, and was given the funding to bring it to completion at the
cost of turning it into a tie-in game with an imported plot peppered throughout
it like a seasoning. As much as I have an affinity for vandalising public
property in case it has money in it, I find myself wishing that it had been an
indie game carrying its own charm with its own absurd plot, instead of using
someone else's.

Now, I have no reason to believe that this *was* the case, especially since it
is the third in the series: I'm sure that the game was commissioned in this
manner from the outset, and from that perspective the execution is excellent.
The retro style is well-crafted, with attention paid to the details of what
made games of the era what they were (i.e. games: not trying for realism,
and telling the story in their own way), right down to the pixel graphics that
align themselves to the low-res grid where other games will be clearly full-res
sprites with big pixels, layered haphazardly.

In all the game was well executed and probably quite replayable, but the
Stranger Things bent just doesn't do anything except to remind me that I watched
the series, and ping me the occasional dopamine spike when I recognise a
reference.
